**Date:** November 22, 2023

**Version:** F15

The following changes have been implemented:

### Application Runtimes (Flutter, Starnix, and Web)

#### Starnix

The following updates have been made for Starnix:

* Added a self-profile container feature which allows breakdown of CPU for
  individual syscalls.
* Added `ptrace` UAPI.
* Added "button" support in Starnix input device.
* Added support and fixes for `overlayfs` in Starnix.
* Added an `InterruptibleEvent`-based waiter for Futex support.
* Fixed various security findings when using and handling Futexes.
* Initial support for lock ordering and functionality in Starnix.
* Initial support for RISC-V architecture, adding vDSO and getting first set of
  tests to pass.
* Initial support for `fsverity` `ioctl`.
* Initial support for Perfetto as consumer for Starnix traces.
* Initial support for `inotify` and ensuring that the corresponding LTP tests
  are passing.
* Implemented `gettimeofday` and `clock_gettime` in vDSO to get faster speeds.
* Implemented Magma semaphore import and export to return sync files.
* Implemented `MADV_DONTFORK` and `MADV_WIPEONFORK` for `madvise()`.
* Improve the binder interface by making it more reliable and fix various race
  and locking issues.
* Performance improvements for syscalls using the following techniques:
  * Use `Mutex` instead of `RwLock`.
  * Synchronously handle triggered events.
  * Use `DenseMap` instead of `HashMap`.
  * Use Futex instead of `zx::Port`.
* Wired up `statfs` for remote filesystems.

#### Web

The following updates have been made for Web:

* Improved memory allocation efficiency by always sending constraints before
  waiting.
* Fixed two fiddle check failures when the replies are missing to avoid crashes
  in some edge cases.
* Removed loop in `ProcessDeferredAccessibilityEventsImpl` which improves the
  performance of accessibility features.

### Connectivity (Bluetooth, IOT, WLAN, Netstack)

The following updates have been made for Connectivity:

#### Bluetooth

* Fixed issues where some speakers were unable to connect audio.
* Fixed an issue where media information was not showing up when paired with
  some phones.

### Developer

The following updates have been made for Developer workflows:

* Added `ffx auth plugin`.
* Added a default SDK version if no version is passed into the
  `ffx product list` tool.
* Added `ffx ffx-storage` in-tree only.
* Added an ABI check to Overnet between host tool and device.
* Removed support for fetching PBv1 from the `ffx product` tool.
* Removed the unused `ffx product-bundle` tool.
* Removed the Overnet tool.
* Updated `ffx target flash` to communicate directly to device.
* Updated `ffx target flash` to load `ProductBundle` from zip without
  extracting the zip.

### Diagnostics

The following updates have been made for Diagnostics:

* Added various additional APIs for asserting `Inspect` data in Rust.
* Deleted `remote-diagnostics-bridge`.
* Fixed moniker format returned by `ArchiveAccessor`.
* Improved Diagnostics Persistence performance by enabling requesting persisting
  data associated when multiple tags are used at the same time.
* Improved formatting of arrays for `ffx inspect` and `query`.
* Updated `log_listener` to use the same API as `ffx log`.
* Updated `run-test-suite` to leverage a faster protocol for logging when
  running on the host.
* Updated all Rust components to use `InspectSink`.

### FIDL

The following updates have been made for FIDL:

* Added `fidl::IsWire<T>`.
* Added experimental flag for `allow_arbitrary_error_types`.
* Added compatibility [best practices][fidl-best-practices].
* Enabled unknown interactions everywhere.
* Fixed HLCPP conversion with unknown interactions.
* Included resolved type of aliases in IR (Intermediate Representation).
* Removed "has envelope" property.
* Removed FIDL wire format V1. See [RFC-0229: FIDL 2023][rfc-0229] for
  more information about the long-term support of the wire format.
* Removed transport error from `fpromise::result constructors`.
* Updated `TransportErr` to serialize for natural bindings.
* Updated `@transitional` to be behind an allowlist.

### Timekeeping

The following updates have been made for Timekeeping:

* Updates to use `mmap` to read large files instead of loading wholesale which
  resulted in 7MiB of saved RAM.

[fidl-best-practices]: /docs/contribute/updatability/best-practices.md
[rfc-0229]: /docs/contribute/governance/rfcs/0229_fidl_2023.md