**Date:** May 3, 2024

**Version:** F17

The following changes have been implemented:

### Developer

The following updates have been made for Developer workflows:

#### Tools

* Updated `ffx` to print all subcommands from `ffx --help`.
* Updated `ffx flash` to use event based reconnect.
* Updated `ffx screenshot` to support machine output.
* Updated `ffx ssh` to enable using ssh-agent identities.
* Validate `ffx` subtool machine outputs against schema.

#### Command Line

* Added support for Composite audio devices in `ffx client`.
* Added `ffx debug crash`.
* Added `ffx-starnix` to the partner SDK.
* Added a break-on-failure option for `ffx test`.
* Added an option to disable symbolizer for `ffx log`.
* Added a switch to force spawning a new `DebugAgent` for `ffx debug`.
* Added support for lists based on a branch for making a product bundle with `ffx`.
* Added netstack as `OWNERS` of `ffx net`.
* Added support for downloading product bundle based on a product name and skip the lookup.
* Added a command to collect early boot profiles.
* Added a tool runner installer to `ffx sdk`.
* Cleaned up old help flags related to `--no-auto-attach-limbo` for `zxdb`.
* Cleaned up test targets for `ffx test`.
* Improved the build error messages for goldens with `ffx`.
* Normalized bug URLs for fxbug.dev.
* Removed `ffx schema`.
* Removed the escape hatch for daemon flashing and bootloader in `ffx target`.
* Removed unused NUD configuration parameters in netstack.
* Symbolize `fxt` files for tracing.
