**Date:** May 3, 2024

**Version:** F18

The following changes have been implemented:

### Application Runtimes (Flutter, Starnix, and Web)

#### Starnix

The following updates have been made for Starnix:

* Added support for `strace`.
* Added support for RISC-V Vector, enabling more RISC-V tests.

### Connectivity (Bluetooth, IOT, WLAN, Netstack)

The following updates have been made for Connectivity:

#### WLAN

* Added additional detection of WLAN hardware error conditions which allows for
  automatic connection recovery.

#### Thread

* Added support for managing internet settings on devices.
* Added capabilities in FIDL to support lowpan for the Thread Internet Settings
  toggle.

#### Matter

* Added support for handling multiple IP addresses simultaneously when
  discovering devices.

### Developer

The following updates have been made for Developer workflows:

#### Tools

* Added schema and validation for `ffx version`.
* Added support for machine JSON to `ffx target show`.
* Added `virtuo-gpu-pci` device for QEMU builds.
* Increased the path length limits for `ffx trace`.
* Updated `ffx config` to allow host tool path overrides.

#### Command Line

* Added assembly logic for cpu manager.
* Added assembly logic for the power metrics recorder.
* Added boilerplate for `ffx net filter` command.
* Added `ffx repository package-archive`.
* Added platform resources to product size checker.
* Added support to allow overriding of test label for golden files.
* Added support to allow repeating with retry in `ffx target echo`.
* Added support in `ffx` to allow serving a repository without a device.
* Added support for subpackages in the Fuchsia repository.
* Deprecated the original `ffx net filter` command to be replaced with a new one.
* Removed `Get` and `SetMinDriverLogSeverity` from the `fdf` Controller interface.
* Removed unused route allowlist feature in `scrutiny`.
* Updated the help text of the `ffx device` and `ffx list-devices` commands.

### Diagnostics

The following updates have been made for Diagnostics:

*   Removed deprecated  LogSettings.RegisterInterest
*   Sampler now includes power metrics related data
*   Archivist can now be configured using configuration capabilities
*   The contract between netstack2 and archivist was updated with explicit directory routing
*   ffx log --select now takes precedence over the --severity flag
*   FDF DriverBase now provides an inspector
*   Log verbosity is now consistently encoded as severity

### FIDL

The following updates have been made for FIDL:
ß
* Added update to allow dead code in traits for the rust toolchain.
* Added `fuchsia-controller` float conformance tests.
* Enabled remaining encode tests.
* Fixed type shape bugs.
* Unblocked `-Wextra-qualification`.
* Updated `fuchsia-controller` union tests for conformance.
* Refactored conversions and disallow `integer&lt;->float` in `fidlc`.
* Removed `@transitional`.
* Removed `HasClone` and `HasCopy` from `fidlc`.
* Removed outdated tests and documentation.
* Removed `--tables` flag from `fidlc`.

### Graphics and Media

The following updates have been made for Graphics and Media:

* Added mali driver for out of tree development.

### HCI (Input, A11y, i18n, and View System)

The following updates have been made for UI:

* Fixed brightness channel overflows.

### Testing

The following updates have been made for testing:

* Added update to retrieve kernel coverage data through a new `ffx` tool.
